19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American

May 16,2019 | 6 min read G Add Us On Google @

How Do We Breathe?
An inhalation activity from Science Buddies

BY SCIENCE BUDDIES & SABINE DE BRABANDERE

In and out: Learn how physics plays a role in every breath you take. George Retseck

Biology v

Key Concepts
Biology

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/ 1/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American

The body
Lungs
Physics

Air pressure

Introduction

We breathe a lot—roughly 10 times a minute! Have you ever wondered how
the process of breathing works so smoothly? Our lungs allow us to inhale the
oxygen our body needs, but they do much, much more. They also allow us to
get rid of carbon dioxide, the waste product created in the body, and they play
a vital role in singing, shouting and even giggling. In this activity you will
make a model of a lung and use it to discover how air flows in and out of the

lungs with ease.

Background

All cells in our body need oxygen to create energy efficiently. When the cells
create energy, however, they make carbon dioxide. We get oxygen by
breathing in fresh air, and we remove carbon dioxide from the body by

breathing out stale air. But how does the breathing mechanism work?

Air flows in via our mouth or nose. The air then follows the windpipe, which
splits first into two bronchi: one for each lung. The bronchi then split into
smaller and smaller tubes that have tiny air sacs at their end called alveoli. We
have millions of alveoli in our lungs! These sacs have thin walls—so thin that
oxygen and carbon dioxide can pass through them and enter or leave our
blood. The blood transports oxygen to almost every part of the body. The

blood also gives the carbon dioxide a ride back to the lungs.

Lungs take up most of the space in the chest. The 12 pairs of ribs in our ribcage
protect the lungs and other organs in our chest cavity, such as our heart.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/ 2/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American
Relaxed breathing is a reflex; we do not have to think to breathe. During this
unforced inhalation our diaphragm—the dome-shaped muscle between the
chest and the abdominal cavity—flattens. This expands the chest cavity and as
a result air is drawn in. During exhalation the diaphragm relaxes and the lungs

naturally recoil, and air is gently pushed out.

We can also breathe more forcefully. When we exercise, sing loudly or
otherwise need or want more air or oxygen we can exert force to breathe more
deeply. We use various muscles to increase chest volume more dramatically. In
the same way as in relaxed breathing the expansion of the chest cavity draws
air in so the lungs fill up. The relaxation of the chest cavity pushes air out.
Muscles can also force the chest cavity to contract even further, pushing even
more air out. Because the expansions and contractions are larger in this case a
bigger volume of air flows in and out of our lungs, and our body gets a larger

supply of oxygen or we have more air to create sound.
Materials

e Disposable empty transparent bottle (10-16 fluid ounces) made of hard
plastic (such as a sports drink bottle)

e Ruler

e Two balloons (8-inch balloons work well)

Utility knife (have an adult help and use caution when using the knife)

Adult helper
e Scissors

e Drinking straw (optional)

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/ 3/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American

¢ Modeling clay (optional)
e Tape (optional)

e Additional balloon (optional)

Preparation

e Ask an adult to cut the plastic bottle. Cut off the bottle's bottom so that when
a balloon hangs inside the bottle from the spout there is about 1/3 to 3/4 of

an inch of empty space below the balloon.

Place the cut bottle down on the wide opening. Lower a balloon into the
bottle until only part of the balloon's neck sticks out. Fold the neck of the

balloon over the top of the bottle. The balloon represents a lung.

e Turn the bottle over (keeping the balloon inside) so the bottle top rests on
the table. In the next steps you will create and add the diaphragm to your

model.

e Make a knot in the neck of the second balloon. At the opposite side of this
balloon cut off about a third of the balloon so you are left with a wide

opening.

Stretch the wide opening of the cut balloon over the wide opening of the
bottle. Pull the edges of the balloon far enough up the bottle so the balloon
surface is gently stretched. Make sure that the knot is on the outside and

located near the middle of the bottle opening.

e Like an inflated balloon our lungs are full of air. We have two lungs, which
are enclosed in the ribcage and protected by 24 ribs. When you breathe in,

air flows into your lungs. When you breathe out, air flows out of your lungs.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/ 4/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American

The balloon inside the bottle is like one of your lungs. The bottle is like your

ribcage.

Procedure

Hold the bottle so you can see the balloon inside (representing the lung).

Gently pull down on the knot. What happens to the balloon inside the bottle?

Let the knot come back to its neutral position and then gently push it in.

What happens to the balloon inside the bottle now?
Repeat these steps a few times. Does this resemble breathing? Why?
Which part resembles breathing in and which part resembles breathing out?

If your model is working well, air will rush into the balloon when you pull
the knot outward and flow out when you push the knot inward. Why do you

think this happens?

When we breathe in a relaxed way our diaphragm—the muscle that
separates the chest cavity from the abdominal cavity—moves to expand and

contract the chest cavity. How is that similar to what you do with your model?

Push and pull the knot a few more times. Using the model can you find which

movement of the diaphragmcreates inhalation and which creates exhalation?

Feel your ribs and breathe in deeply then exhale. Can you feel your ribcage
expand and fall back?

The center of our diaphragm moves more when we take deep breaths: up to
four inches! In the model you made, the ribcage (the plastic bottle) is fixed,

but you can move the "diaphragm" more by pulling the knot farther and

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/

5/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American
pushing it in more. Try it out. How does that change the volume of air that flows

in and out of the lung balloon?

Extra: Add a windpipe to your model. To do this take the balloon out of the
bottle and slip its neck over a straw; secure the balloon to the straw with
tape. Hang the balloon—and a short section of the straw—in the bottle's
neck, and use clay to hold it in place. Make sure the clay makes an airtight
seal around the straw and the bottle neck. No change is needed to the second
balloon that closes off the bottom of the bottle. Can you see which part models
the windpipe?

Extra: A cough is the body forcefully expelling air to get rid of something
that caused irritation. During a cough you breathe in relatively deeply but
instead of air flowing out while the chest cavity contracts, your throat closes,
and air builds up in the lungs. When the throat opens the chest contracts
even more and air flows out in a forceful way. Can you mimic a cough with

your model?

e Extra: Find a way to create a model that includes a windpipe that splits into
two bronchi, each with a lung attached. The model with a windpipe and one
lung is a good start. How can you add a second lung? Can you find a reason why
having two lungs is beneficial for us?

Observations and Results

When you pulled the knot back, the space inside the bottle increased and your

balloon probably filled up with air. In the same way, when the diaphragm in

our body pulls back, the chest cavity increases and air flows into our lungs, and

we inhale.

When you pushed the knot in, the space inside the bottle decreased, and the

balloon probably deflated. In the same way, when the diaphragm relaxes the

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/ 6/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American

chest cavity decreases, and air is pushed out of the lungs, and we exhale.

When you pulled and pushed the knot further the balloon inflated and deflated
more. This mirrors what happens when a bigger volume of air is displaced

when we breathe more deeply.

This dynamic works because of air pressure, a measure of how hard air presses
against objects. Air pressure increases when you decrease the amount of space
the air has—and decreases when you give air more space. Close a flimsy empty
plastic bottle and try to compress it. It is difficult! The air inside pushes back.
Open the bottle, and try to compress the bottle again. It is much easier. The air
presses back with a much reduced force. Unless something blocks the
movement, air will move from areas of high pressure to areas where the
pressure is lower, and this is what happens when air rushes in or out of the
lungs. When the chest cavity expands there is more space around your lungs.
In this condition the lungs can expand, making it a low-pressure area, and air
rushes in to balance out the difference in pressure. Then to breathe out the
chest cavity and lungs shrink. This raises the air pressure in your lungs, and

the air rushes back out.

More to Explore Your Lungs & Respiratory System, from KidsHealth

Lung Capacity and Age, from Science Buddies

Build a Balloon-Powered Car, from Scientific American Under Pressure: Launch
a Balloon Rocket, from Scientific American STEM Activities for Kids, from

Science Buddies

This activity brought to you in partnership with Science Buddies

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/ 7/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American
o

SCIENCE BUDDIES is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization whose mission is to inspire and educate students of all
ages with hands-on STEM experiments that reflect a range of interests.

More by Science Buddies

More by Sabine De Brabandere

It’s Time to Stand Up for Science

If you enjoyed this article, I’d like to ask for your support. Scientific American has served as an
advocate for science and industry for 180 years, and right now may be the most critical moment in that
two-century history.

I’ve been a Scientific American subscriber since | was 12 years old, and it helped shape the way | look
at the world. SciAm always educates and delights me, and inspires a sense of awe for our vast,
beautiful universe. | hope it does that for you, too.

If you subscribe to Scientific American, you help ensure that our coverage is centered on meaningful
research and discovery; that we have the resources to report on the decisions that threaten labs across
the U.S.; and that we support both budding and working scientists at a time when the value of science

itself too often goes unrecognized.

In return, you get essential news, captivating podcasts, brilliant infographics, can't-miss newsletters,
must-watch videos, challenging games, and the science world's best writing and reporting. You can
even gift someone a subscription.

There has never been a more important time for us to stand up and show why science matters. | hope
you'll support us in that mission.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/

8/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American

Thank you,

David M. Ewalt, Editor in Chief, Scientific American

Popular Stories

MIND & BRAIN | JANUARY 16, 2026

RFK, Jr., shifts focus to
questioning whether cell phones
are safe. Here’s what the science
says

The possible health effects of radiofrequency waves

emitted by cell phones has been a subject of debate for
decades

JACKIE FLYNN MOGENSEN

SPACE EXPLORATION §f JANUARY 17, 2026

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/

THE UNIVERSE JJ JANUARY 16, 2026

For Stars, It’s Not Easy Being
Green

Stars emit lots of green light, but our eyes don’t let us
see them that way

PHIL PLAIT

ANIMALS [| JANUARY 16, 2026

9/10

19/01/2026, 02:03 How Do We Breathe? | Scientific American

NASA’s Artemis I] mission to the It’s so cold in Florida that iguanas
moon is inching toward launch might rain from the skies

NASA rolled out the fully stacked Artemis I] rocket and _Florida’s iguanas are an introduced species, and they
Orion capsule on Saturday, embarking on a four-mile aren't used to the chilly temperatures the state is
journey to the launch pad currently experiencing

CLAIRE CAMERON MEGHAN BARTELS

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE [| JANUARY 17, 2026 STRING THEORY [J JANUARY 14, 2026

The next Al revolution could start Does String Theory Explain the
with world models Wiring of the Brain?

Why today’s AI systems struggle with consistency, and | Mathematical tools from string theory are giving
how emerging world models aim to give machines a scientists a new way to study the networking of
steady grasp of space and time neurons

DENI ELLIS BECHARD LEE BILLINGS

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-we-breathe/ 10/10