19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

January 25, 2019 G Add Us On Google @

Why Do We Sleep?

There are plenty of theories, but nobody really knows for sure

BY TEODORA STOICA

Neuroscience v

This article was published in Scientific American’s former blog network and reflects

the views of the author, not necessarily those of Scientific American

Try to explain to an alien why we sleep. Give it your best shot.

“Well, we get tired. And our brain needs to rest.”

“I see. So, you find another way to defend yourself during rest?”

“Well... no. Our body is paralyzed, and we lose consciousness.”

There is an awkward pause. The alien tilts its head, feigning understanding.
“But! We sometimes dream!”in

“Dream?”

Blindly, unaware of how ridiculous you sound, you continue with
unprecedented speed and cadence: “Yes! Dreams are fantastical stories
projected from the mind into the mind, sometimes mixed with things that have

already happened!”

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 1/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

You catch your breath, and smile idiotically.

“And... this helps with survival?”

“Well... no. Sometimes the content confuses us in waking life,” you suddenly realize.
The alien blinks silently a few times, furrowing his non-eyebrows:

“Let me see if I understand. Your species spends one third of their lives paralyzed

watching fantasy movies?”

It is reasonable to assume the human race is doomed at this uncomfortable
juncture in the conversation, and aliens will plan their stealthy attack during

this incapacitated, seemingly futile stage of our existence.

But sleep isn’t futile. In fact, theories on sleep assert its role in reenergizing the
body's cells, clearing waste from the brain, and supporting learning and
memory. It can even regulate mood, appetite and libido. Yet what precisely

happens in our head when it hits the pillow? E.T., you got some learnin’ to do.

Reflections on why we sleep have existed since the beginning of recorded
history. Some 2,000 years ago, Leucippus, the first “atomist,” described sleep as
something that happened to the body when “the excretion of fine-textured

atoms exceeds the accretion of psychic warmth.” Fanciful.

Another famed ancient, Lucretius, thought sleep is caused by the spirit being
attacked and weakened into a state of senescence by mysterious air particles.
Absurd. Lastly, Aristotle distinguished sleep and waking as diametrically
opposed phenomena characterized by the absence or presence of perception.
On the money. He stated: “Sleep is induced by the exhalations of ingested foods
which thicken and heat the blood, rising to the brain where they are cooled

before coalescing in the heart.”

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 2/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American
Well at least he had the brain part right. Indeed, electroencephalographic
(EEG) data measuring brain waves have categorized sleep into two states: non-
REM (or NREM, further divided into stages S1, $2, $3 and S4) and REM,

which repeat every 90 minutes several times during the night.

When overcome by drowsiness but still awake, brain waves become slower,
increase in height (amplitude) and become more synchronous (alpha waves).
The first official stage of sleep serves as transition between awake and sleep,
and is characterized by theta waves, which are even slower in number
(frequency) and greater in amplitude than alpha waves. Many sleep-deprived
individuals experience microsleeps (frighteningly, while driving!), which are
second-long temporary sleep episodes where theta waves replace alpha wave

activity. Most people are not even aware they were asleep.

During stage 2 sleep, theta wave activity continues, interspersed with
oscillations between the thalamus, a region of the brain regulating sleep, and
the rest of the cortex. Stages 1 and 2 are relatively "light" stages of sleep, where

waking up is easy and the sleeper might not recognize they were asleep at all.

Onto stage 3 and 4, characterized by delta waves, the slowest and highest
amplitude brain waves, the most unlike waking brain waves. Since delta sleep
is the deepest sleep, it is the most difficult stage in which to wake sleepers, and
when they are awakened, they are usually sleepy and disoriented. Interestingly,

delta sleep is when sleep walking and sleep talking is most likely to occur.

During NREM sleep, sensory information continues to be transferred and
encoded in a similar way to the brain when awake—especially at the level of
sensory cortices. As sleep progresses, reactivity and awareness decrease.

Perceptual activity becomes progressively autonomous. The mind becomes

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 3/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

focused inwards and becomes less constrained by input from the external
environment.

This pattern is visualized in analyses examining resting-state networks,
networks of brain regions activated synchronously. The data show that two
networks remain active similarly to when awake: the default mode network
and sensory motor network. The default mode network is activated during
self-generated thought (daydreaming), while the sensory network is activated
during stimulus perception. Connectivity to the central executive network, a
network active during higher-order processing such as inhibition, is reduced

(Figure 1), letting thoughts roam fancy free and creating illogical scenarios

Default Mode Network Sensory Motor Network Central Executive Network

Medial Posterior Motor Sensory Dorsolateral Posterior
Prefrontal Cingulate Cortex Cortex Prefrontal Parietal

Cortex Cortex Cortex

Figure 1. The resting state networks (RSNs) involved in sleep. Credit: Teodora Stoica

Finally, the one Freud was all excited about: REM. This stage gets its name
from the darting eye movements that accompany it (Rapid Eye Movement).
Interestingly, it is also characterized by a sudden and dramatic loss of muscle
tone—effectively paralysis. Importantly, it is neurologically identical to waking
(dyssynchronous brain waves) and further characterized by variable changes in

blood pressure, heart rate and overall breathing rate. And of course, dreams.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 4/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

Plato was the first to muse psychologically about dreams, stating: “In all of us,
even the most highly respectable, there is a lawless wild beast nature, which
peers out in sleep.” This presages Freud’s wish-fulfillment theory of dreaming
yet doesn’t neurologically explain that thing Martin Luther King, Jr., had in
1963.

Firstly, dreams are not hallucinations. While they share some characteristics in
common with clinical disorders such as schizophrenia, hallucinations are
defined by whole-brain activation. They are veridical movies projected onto
reality that the individual remembers well. Dreams in contrast, are
characterized by primary and secondary sensory cortices activation, coupled
with disrupted recruitment of the frontal cortex, gate keeper of important
higher-order functions like inhibition. If the dream is imbibed in high in

emotional content, the limbic system is also implicated.

Critically, lack of frontal function opens the floodgates to reduced self-
awareness and bizarre dream contents, while restricting any incoming
information and creating a tight self-contained dream loop. This is perhaps
most poetically described by Heraclitus, who commented on the subjective
nature of dreams in his memorable phrase, “for those who are awake there is a
single, common universe, whereas in sleep each person turns away into his

own private universe.”

A note on lucid dreaming—being aware that you're in a dream. A few studies
have found evidence for increased activation of the prefrontal cortex during
lucid dreaming, compared to normal REM sleep. The area’s typical
deactivation is responsible for the socially inappropriate behaviors and
inability to reason logically that is sometimes experienced during dreams, if

they are remembered upon waking.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 5/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

In case you don’t remember your dreams, you can always Google them.
Seriously. The Google artificial neural network is like a computer brain,
inspired by the central nervous system of animals. When given free rein to
create images out of white noise, it outputs beautiful, intricate, Escher-esque
images, what Google engineers are terming “AI Dreams.” The neural network’s
dreams are being used to understand how a computer can make sense out of

nonsense—or learn.

We've arrived at E.T.’s original inquiry: “But why do we sleep?” The easiest
answer is, we don't yet know, but theories abound. One theory has to do with
sleep playing an important role in memory consolidation, that is, a memory’s
ability to stick. Research suggests REM sleep strengthens weakened neural
circuits holding past memories to prepare them for future cognitive
processing, in addition to filtering out unnecessary memories. A study by Poe,
et. al (2014) articulates this: “The evidence points to an overall function of
embossing of synaptic circuits to add definition to and integrate memories,
distinguishing them from the noise introduced to synaptic weights throughout

wakefulness.”

Termed the “synaptic homeostasis hypothesis,” it suggests that during sleep
there is widespread weakening of connections (synapses) throughout the
brain. This is thought to counterbalance the overall strengthening of
connections that occurs during learning when we are awake. By pruning away
excess connections, sleep effectively “cleans the slate” so we can learn again the
next day. Interfering with this scaling down process can, in some cases, lead to

more intense (and perhaps unwanted) memories.

Another theory, since E.T. doesn’t seem impressed, is that sleep is restorative:

it flushes out toxins. During sleep, the space between brain cells increases,

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 6/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

allowing toxic proteins to be flushed out. It’s possible that by removing these
toxins from the brain, sleep may stave off neurodegenerative diseases like
Alzheimer’s. Indeed, in an October 2013 issue of the journal Science,
researchers published the results of a study indicating that the brain utilizes
sleep to flush out toxins. This waste removal system, they suggest, is one of the
major reasons why we sleep.

While we don’t have a precise overarching definition of sleep’s function, it
impacts different physiological and psychological purposes including cleaning
up brain toxins and consolidating information into memory, so it is possible
that each of these theories can be used to explain why we sleep; we just haven't

worked it out. Give us a break, E.T., we're asleep most of the time.

RIGHTS & PERMISSIONS

TEODORA STOICA is a Ph.D. candidate in the Translational Neuroscience Department at the University of
Louisville. She writes about science on her personal blog CuriousCortex and is a member of the
Communications Committee at the Organization for Human Brain Mapping. You can follow her on Twitter
@CuriousCortex.

More by Teodora Stoica

It’s Time to Stand Up for Science

If you enjoyed this article, I’d like to ask for your support. Scientific American has served as an
advocate for science and industry for 180 years, and right now may be the most critical moment in that
two-century history.

I’ve been a Scientific American subscriber since | was 12 years old, and it helped shape the way | look
at the world. SciAm always educates and delights me, and inspires a sense of awe for our vast,
beautiful universe. | hope it does that for you, too.

If you subscribe to Scientific American, you help ensure that our coverage is centered on meaningful
research and discovery; that we have the resources to report on the decisions that threaten labs across
the U.S.; and that we support both budding and working scientists at a time when the value of science

itself too often goes unrecognized.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 7/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American
In return, you get essential news, captivating podcasts, brilliant infographics, can't-miss newsletters,
must-watch videos, challenging games, and the science world's best writing and reporting. You can
even gift someone a subscription.

There has never been a more important time for us to stand up and show why science matters. | hope
you'll support us in that mission.

Thank you,
David M. Ewalt, Editor in Chief, Scientific American

Popular Stories

MIND & BRAIN | JANUARY 16, 2026 THE UNIVERSE [| JANUARY 16, 2026
RFK, Jr., shifts focus to For Stars, It’s Not Easy Being
questioning whether cell phones Green

A .
are safe. Here’s what the science Stars emit lots of green light, but our eyes don’t let us
says see them that way
The possible health effects of radiofrequency waves PHIL PLAIT

emitted by cell phones has been a subject of debate for
decades

JACKIE FLYNN MOGENSEN

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 8/10

19/01/2026, 01:58

F

SPACE EXPLORATION

JANUARY 17, 2026

NASA’s Artemis I] mission to the
moon is inching toward launch

NASA rolled out the fully stacked Artemis IT rocket and
Orion capsule on Saturday, embarking on a four-mile
journey to the launch pad

CLAIRE CAMERON

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE | JANUARY 17, 2026

The next Al revolution could start
with world models

Why today’s AI systems struggle with consistency, and
how emerging world models aim to give machines a
steady grasp of space and time

DENI ELLIS BECHARD

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/

Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

ANIMALS jf JANUARY 16, 2026

It’s so cold in Florida that iguanas
might rain from the skies

Florida’s iguanas are an introduced species, and they
aren't used to the chilly temperatures the state is
currently experiencing

MEGHAN BARTELS

STRING THEORY

JANUARY 14, 2026

Does String Theory Explain the
Wiring of the Brain?
Mathematical tools from string theory are giving

scientists a new way to study the networking of

neurons

LEE BILLINGS

9/10

19/01/2026, 01:58 Why Do We Sleep? | Scientific American

Subscribe to Scientific American to learn and share the
most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas

shaping our world today.

Subscription Plans

Give a Gift Subscription

https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/observations/why-do-we-sleep/ 10/10