19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? | Scientific American

November 8, 2004 | 4 min read G Add Us On Google @

How Long Can a Person Survive without Food?

BY ALAN D. LIEBERSON

Hans Neleman Getty Images

Fitness

Alan D. Lieberson, a medical doctor, lawyer, and the author of Treatment

of Pain and Suffering in the Terminally Ill and Advance Medical Directives,
explains.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-survive-without-food/ 1/7

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? | Scientific American

The duration of survival without food is greatly influenced by factors such as
body weight, genetic variation, other health considerations and, most

importantly, the presence or absence of dehydration.

For total starvation in healthy individuals receiving adequate hydration,
reliable data on survival are hard to obtain. At the age of 74 and already slight
of build, Mahatma Gandhi, the famous nonviolent campaigner for India's
independence, survived 21 days of total starvation while only allowing himself
sips of water. In a 1997 article in the British Medical Journal, Michael Peel,
senior medical examiner at the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of
Torture, cites well-documented studies reporting survivals of other hunger
strikers for 28, 36, 38 and 40 days. Most other reports of long-term survival of
total starvation, however, have been poorly substantiated. [Editor's Note:
Reports of the 1981 hunger strike by political prisoners against the British presence in
Northeast Ireland indicate that 10 individuals died after periods of between 46 and 73
days without food. |

Unlike total starvation, near-total starvation with continued hydration has
occurred frequently, both in history and in patients under medical supervision.
Survival for many months to years is common in concentration camps and
during famines, but the unknown caloric intake during these times makes it
impossible to predict survival. What is evident is that the body can moderate
metabolism to conserve energy and that individual survival varies markedly.
The body's ability to alter its metabolism is poorly understood, but it occurs at
least in part through changes in thyroid function. This may help explain the
evolutionary persistence of genes causing diabetes, which in the past could
have allowed individuals to survive periods of starvation by enabling more

economical use of energy.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-survive-without-food/

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? | Scientific American

Medical practitioners encounter cases of near-total starvation in patients
suffering from, among other conditions, anorexia nervosa and end-stage
malignancies, as well as in those following so-called starvation diets. In
anorexia, death from organ failure or myocardial infarction is fairly common
(up to 20 percent of cases end this way) and tends to happen when body
weight has fallen to between 60 and 80 pounds (although it can occur at any
time). This weight typically corresponds to a body mass index (BMI)
approximately half of normal, or about 12 to 12.5. (Normal BMI is 18.5-24.9,
and most fashion models have a BMI of around 17.) Unless other causes
intervene, a patient with end-stage cancer often dies after losing 35 to 45
percent of his body weight. Markedly obese patients on near-starvation diets,
such as those employing nutritional supplements and consuming less than 400
calories a day, may lose much more weight than that--but they start with great
excesses of body fat, which can sustain metabolism. The medical community
has generally rejected these diets, which were popular in the 1960s and 1970s,

because participants were reportedly prone to acute myocardial infarctions.

I recall one particularly relevant experience that illustrates the inherent
variability in people's ability to survive on very little food. Called in an
emergency to see an out-of-town visitor with a throat abscess one Saturday
afternoon, I noted his marked thinness, along with a belt showing twelve extra
holes at about one-inch intervals, each showing evidence of use. I asked him
about his weight and he told me he was five feet, seven inches tall and
normally weighed about 145 pounds, but he thought he had noted ;some;
recent loss, maybe; down to about 100 pounds over the prior year. He gwasn't
trying; to lose weight, but it didn't bother him because he thought thinner was
better. He just ;didn't feel like eating much.; With clothes on, he weighed just

77 pounds. After he left town for further treatment, I never heard from him

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-survive-without-food/

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? | Scientific American

again, but he had seemingly lost close to half his body weight without noticing
any ill effects.

In contrast to starvation with access to liquids, much more is known about
survival without any sustenance (neither food nor hydration), which is a far
more important practical consideration in medicine and ethics. This situation
comes up frequently in two distinct medical groups--the incompetent
terminally ill patients for whom artificial maintenance of life is no longer
desired, and the individuals who, although not necessarily terminally ill, no

longer want to live and decide to refuse food and hydration to end their lives.

A well-known example of the former is Nancy Cruzan, the subject of the
famous 1990 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Cruzan versus Director, Missouri
Department of Health. Cruzan was in a persistent vegetative state (PVS) for
many years until she died 12 days after artificial sustenance was discontinued.
Since that time, many other incidences of discontinuing sustenance in patients
in a PVS have been reported and death typically occurs after 10 to 14 days. (If
the individual is dehydrated or over-hydrated, the time may range from
approximately one to three weeks.) In situations of voluntary refusal of food
and hydration, death typically ensues on a similar time frame, although the

early use of ice chips or sips of water to reduce thirst may delay this slightly.

RIGHTS & PERMISSIONS

More by Alan D. Lieberson

It’s Time to Stand Up for Science

If you enjoyed this article, I’d like to ask for your support. Scientific American has served as an
advocate for science and industry for 180 years, and right now may be the most critical moment in that
two-century history.

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-survive-without-food/

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? | Scientific American
I’ve been a Scientific American subscriber since | was 12 years old, and it helped shape the way | look
at the world. SciAm always educates and delights me, and inspires a sense of awe for our vast,
beautiful universe. | hope it does that for you, too.

If you subscribe to Scientific American, you help ensure that our coverage is centered on meaningful
research and discovery; that we have the resources to report on the decisions that threaten labs across
the U.S.; and that we support both budding and working scientists at a time when the value of science

itself too often goes unrecognized.

In return, you get essential news, captivating podcasts, brilliant infographics, can't-miss newsletters,
must-watch videos, challenging games, and the science world's best writing and reporting. You can
even gift someone a subscription.

There has never been a more important time for us to stand up and show why science matters. | hope
you'll support us in that mission.

Thank you,
David M. Ewalt, Editor in Chief, Scientific American

Popular Stories

MIND & BRAIN JJ JANUARY 16, 2026 THE UNIVERSE [J JANUARY 16, 2026
RFK, Jr., shifts focus to For Stars, It’s Not Easy Being
questioning whether cell phones Green

; .
are safe. Here’s what the science Stars emit lots of green light, but our eyes don’t let us
says see them that way
The possible health effects of radiofrequency waves PHIL PLAIT

emitted by cell phones has been a subject of debate for
decades

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-survive-without-food/

19/01/2026, 02:01
JACKIE FLYNN MOGENSEN

SPACE EXPLORATION Jf JANUARY 17, 2026

NASA’s Artemis I] mission to the
moon is inching toward launch

NASA rolled out the fully stacked Artemis I rocket and
Orion capsule on Saturday, embarking on a four-mile
journey to the launch pad

CLAIRE CAMERON

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

JANUARY 17, 2026

The next Al revolution could start
with world models

Why today’s AI systems struggle with consistency, and
how emerging world models aim to give machines a
steady grasp of space and time

DENI ELLIS BECHARD

How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? | Scientific American

JANUARY 16, 2026

It’s so cold in Florida that iguanas
might rain from the skies

ANIMALS

Florida’s iguanas are an introduced species, and they
aren't used to the chilly temperatures the state is
currently experiencing

MEGHAN BARTELS

STRING THEORY ff JANUARY 14, 2026

Does String Theory Explain the
Wiring of the Brain?

Mathematical tools from string theory are giving
scientists a new way to study the networking of

neurons

LEE BILLINGS

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-survive-without-food/

6/7

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? | Scientific American

Subscribe to Scientific American to learn and share the
most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas

shaping our world today.

Subscription Plans

Give a Gift Subscription

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-survive-without-food/

77