19/01/2026, 02:02 Human respiratory system | Description, Parts, Function, & Facts | Britannica

Ask the Chatbot a Question

human respiratory system
physiology

bronchioles.
Quick Summary | | Ask the Chatbot :
view)

@ Arthur A. Sicbens + All @ Britannica Editors [* Jan. 12, 2026 + History

tb
(cut away)

=: Table of Contents

diaphragm

Top Questions

© Encycropana Brtannca re

What is the human respiratory system? v human lungs ‘The lungs serve as the gas-
exchanging organ for the process of

How does the human body take in oxygen and remove carbon dioxide? v respiration.

What are the main organs involved in breathing? v

What is the process of gas exchange in the lungs? v

Vv Show more

The design of the respiratory system

The human gas-exchanging organ, the lung, is located in the thorax,
where its delicate tissues are protected by the bony and muscular
thoracic cage. The lung provides the tissues of the human body with a
continuous flow of oxygen and clears the blood of the gaseous waste
product, carbon dioxide. Atmospheric air is pumped in and out

regularly through a system of pipes, called conducting airways, which

join the gas-exchange region with the outside of the body. The Passage of air through the respiratory

* se : : tract explained The respiratory tract
airways can be divided into upper and lower airway systems. The conveys air from the mouth and nc...(more)
transition between the two systems is located where the pathways of See all videos for this article

the respiratory and digestive systems cross, just at the top of the

larynx.

and partly also the oral cavity, since it may be used for breathing. The lower airway system consists of the
larynx, the trachea, the stem bronchi, and all the airways ramifying intensively within the lungs, such as the
intrapulmonary bronchi, the bronchioles, and the alveolar ducts. For respiration, the collaboration of other
organ systems is clearly essential. The diaphragm, as the main respiratory muscle, and the intercostal muscles

of the chest wall play an essential role by generating, under the control of the central nervous system, the

https://www.britannica.com/science/human-respiratory-system 1/5

19/01/2026, 02:02 Human respiratory system | Description, Parts, Function, & Facts | Britannica
pumping action on the lung. The muscles expand and contract the internal space of the thorax, the bony

framework of which is formed by the ribs and the thoracic vertebrae. The contribution of the lung and chest

for the gases, and the circulatory system (i.e., the heart and the blood vessels) are mandatory elements of a

working respiratory system (see blood; cardiovascular system).

The Human Body

Click a button below to see layers.

Click an area of
the body to
zoom in.

Respiratory Renal
system

© Encyclopzedia Britannica, Inc.

Morphology of the upper airways

https://www.britannica.com/science/human-respiratory-system

2/5

19/01/2026, 02:02 Human respiratory system | Description, Parts, Function, & Facts | Britannica
The nose

The nose is the external protuberance of an internal space, the nasal
cavity. It is subdivided into a left and right canal by a thin medial
cartilaginous and bony wall, the nasal septum. Each canal opens to the
face by a nostril and into the pharynx by the choana. The floor of the
nasal cavity is formed by the palate, which also forms the roof of the

of bony ridges, the superior, middle, and inferior turbinate bones (or

How much air do you breathe in a
lifetime? Every minute, multiple liters of air

conchae), from the lateral wall. The passageways thus formed below are cycled through your lungs.
each ridge are called the superior, middle, and inferior nasal meatuses. See all videos for this article
>

Facts You Should Know: The Human Body Quiz

On each side, the intranasal space communicates with a series of neighbouring air-filled cavities within the

skull (the paranasal sinuses) and also, via the nasolacrimal duct, with the lacrimal apparatus in the corner of

the eye. The duct drains the lacrimal fluid into the nasal cavity. This fact explains why nasal respiration can be
rapidly impaired or even impeded during weeping: the lacrimal fluid is not only overflowing into tears, it is also
flooding the nasal cavity.

The paranasal sinuses are sets of paired single or multiple cavities of variable size. Most of their development
takes place after birth, and they reach their final size toward age 20. The sinuses are located in four different
skull bones—the maxilla, the frontal, the ethmoid, and the sphenoid bones. Correspondingly, they are called
the maxillary sinus, which is the largest cavity; the frontal sinus; the ethmoid sinuses; and the sphenoid sinus,
which is located in the upper posterior wall of the nasal cavity. The sinuses have two principal functions:

because they are filled with air, they help keep the weight of the skull within reasonable limits, and they serve

as resonance chambers for the human voice.

[sos |

The nasal cavity with its adjacent spaces is lined by a respiratory mucosa. Typically, the mucosa of the nose

contains mucus-secreting glands and venous plexuses; its top cell layer, the epithelium, consists principally of
two cell types, ciliated and secreting cells. This structural design reflects the particular anci

ry functions of
the nose and of the upper airways in general with respect to respiration. They clean, moisten, and warm the

inspired air, preparing it for intimate contact with the delicate tissues of the gas-exchange area. During

expiration through the nose, the air is dried and cooled, a process that saves water and energy.

Two regions of the nasal cavity have a different lining. The vestibule, at
Related Topics: lung + trachea « larynx

the entrance of the nose, is lined by skin that bears short thick hairs
* pharynx * gas exchange

called vibrissae. In the roof of the nose, the olfactory bulb with its

https://www.britannica.com/science/human-respiratory-system 3/5

19/01/2026, 02:02 Human respiratory system | Description, Parts, Function, & Facts | Britannica

sensory epithelium checks the quality of the inspired air. About two On the Web: Biology LibreTexts -
. Structure and Function of the
dozen olfactory nerves convey the sensation of smell from the olfactory Respiratory System (an. 12, 2026)

cells through the bony roof of the nasal cavity to the central nervous

See all related content

system.

The pharynx

For the anatomical description, the pharynx can be divided into three
floors. The upper floor, the nasopharynx, is primarily a passageway for

air and secretions from the nose to the oral pharynx. It is also connected
to the tympanic cavity of the middle ear through the auditory tubes that
open on both lateral walls. The act of swallowing opens briefly the

normally collapsed auditory tubes and allows the middle ears to be

aerated and pressure differences to be equalized. In the posterior wall of
. . . human pharynx Sagittal section of the
the nasopharynx is located a lymphatic organ, the pharyngeal tonsil. pharynx.

When it is enlarged (as in tonsil hypertrophy or adenoid vegetation), it

The middle floor of the pharynx connects anteriorly to the mouth and is therefore called the oral pharynx or

oropharynx. It is delimited from the nasopharynx by the soft palate, which roofs the posterior part of the oral

cavity.

directly behind the larynx. The epiglottis, a cartilaginous, leaf-shaped flap, functions as a lid to the larynx and,

during the act of swallowing, controls the traffic of air and food.

Morphology of the lower airways
The larynx

The larynx is an organ of complex structure that serves a dual function: as an air canal to the lungs and a
controller of its access, and as the organ of phonation. Sound is produced by forcing air through a sagittal slit

formed by the vocal cords, the glottis. This causes not only the vocal cords but also the column of air above
them to vibrate. As evidenced by trained singers, this function can be closely controlled and finely tuned.
Control is achieved by a number of muscles innervated by the laryngeal nerves. For the precise function of the

of almost a dozen pieces of cartilage, most of them very small, interconnected by ligaments and membranes.

The largest cartilage of the larynx, the thyroid cartilage, is made of two plates fused anteriorly in the midline.
At the upper end of the fusion line is an incision, the thyroid notch; below it is a forward projection, the
laryngeal prominence. Both of these structures are easily felt through the skin. The angle between the two
cartilage plates is sharper and the prominence more marked in men than in women, which has given this

structure the common name of Adam’s apple.

https://www.britannica.com/science/human-respiratory-system 4/5

19/01/2026, 02:02 Human respiratory system | Description, Parts, Function, & Facts | Britannica

The voice-producing apparatus

Behind the shieldlike thyroid cartilage, the vocal cords span the

resonators—used to produce
voice quality and sounds such

laryngeal lumen. They correspond to elastic ligaments attached we qual a

anteriorly in the angle of the thyroid shield and posteriorly to a pair of eto the quay of vowel sounds 1. |
small pyramidal pieces of cartilage, the arytenoid cartilages. The vocal 9)
Important ara for producing |

tissue. Just above the vocal cords, the epiglottis is also attached to the wy iN coe canioge Vi
. . 2 \\ XS vocal cords #77]
back of the thyroid plate by its stalk. The cricoid, another large I=: __ rN

cartilaginous piece of the laryngeal skeleton, has a signet-ring shape. vocal conde vocal or in positon

during inhalation ‘0 produce sounds

(© Encyclopedia Btannia, Inc

The broad plate of the ring lies in the posterior wall of the larynx and
voice-producing apparatus The parts of

the narrow arch in the anterior wall. The cricoid is located below the
human anatomy that produce vocal sound.

thyroid cartilage, to which it is joined in an articulation reinforced by

ligaments. The transverse axis of the joint allows a hingelike rotation

between the two cartilages. This movement tilts the cricoid plate with respect to the shield of the thyroid
cartilage and hence alters the distance between them. Because the arytenoid cartilages rest upright on the
cricoid plate, they follow its tilting movement. This mechanism plays an important role in altering length and

and slide to close and open the glottis.

Viewed frontally, the lumen of the laryngeal tube has an hourglass shape, with its narrowest width at the
glottis. Just above the vocal cords there is an additional pair of mucosal folds called the false vocal cords or the
vestibular folds. Like the true vocal cords, they are also formed by the free end of a fibroelastic membrane.
Between the vestibular folds and the vocal cords, the laryngeal space enlarges and forms lateral pockets
extending upward. This space is called the ventricle of the larynx. Because the gap between the vestibular folds
is always larger than the gap between the vocal cords, the latter can easily be seen from above with the
laryngoscope, an instrument designed for visual inspection of the interior of the larynx.

The muscular apparatus of the larynx comprises two functionally distinct groups. The intrinsic muscles act
directly or indirectly on the shape, length, and tension of the vocal cords. The extrinsic muscles act on the
larynx as a whole, moving it upward (e.g., during high-pitched phonation or swallowing) or downward. The
intrinsic muscles attach to the skeletal components of the larynx itself; the extrinsic muscles join the laryngeal
skeleton cranially to the hyoid bone or to the pharynx and caudally to the sternum (breastbone).

Lisinesne J

https://www.britannica.com/science/human-respiratory-system 5/5