19/01/2026, 02:01

How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation

How Long Can You Live Without Q
Food?

8 Medically reviewed by Megan Soliman, MD — Written by Natalie Silver —

Updated on January 19, 2024

How long? Whyitvaries Howisit possible? Water intake

Restricted eating risks FAQ Summary

Experts do not know exactly how long a person can live
without eating, but there are records of people surviving
without food or drink between 8 and 21 days.

Estimates of how long you can live without food are based on events
where people have survived being trapped or buried alive, as it is not
ethical to carry out such experiments on humans.

The length of time a person can survive without any food or water will
depend on various factors, such as the individual’s age and health and
whether or not they have anything else to drink.

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks

1/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation

+ View video transcript

How long can you survive without food?

Food and water consumption is essential to human life. Your body needs
energy from food sources and hydration from water to function properly.
The many systems in your body work optimally with a varied diet and
adequate water intake daily.

But our bodies are also able to survive for days without water. We can go
days or sometimes weeks without food because of adjustments to our
metabolism and energy consumption.

ADVERTISEMENT

Why the survival time period varies

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 2/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation
When a person’s body does not receive enough calories to carry out its
usual life-supporting functions, this is known as starvation. This can
happen if food intake is severely restricted, or if a person’s body cannot
digest food to absorb nutrients.

When the human body is severely deprived of calories, it starts
functioning differently to reduce the amount of energy it burns. If nutrition
is not restored, starvation leads to loss of life.

There is no hard and fast “rule of thumb” for how long you can live
without food. To some extent, the answer depends on individual
differences and circumstances. Information about life expectancy is based
on real world contexts, such as hunger strikes and serious medical
conditions.

With no food and no water, the maximum time the body can survive is
thought to be about one week”. With water only, but no food, survival
time may extend up to 2 to 3 months.

Over time, a severely restricted food intake can reduce the lifespan.

Being underweight, defined as having a body mass index (BMI) below
18.5, is associated with malnutrition and a range of health conditions that
can lower life expectancy. These include reduced immune system
function, digestive conditions, and cancer.

A 2018 study? found that having a BMI below 18.5 could shorten your life
by an average of 4.3 years for males and 4.5 for females.

How is it possible to survive days without food?

Being able to live for days and weeks with no food and water seems
inconceivable to many of us. After all, a daylong fast or even an hours-
long stretch without food and water can make many of us irritable and low
on energy.

Your body actually adjusts itself if you engage in a short-term fast or are
unable to access food and water for very long stretches of time.

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 3/13

19/01/2026, 02:01

How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation
For this reason, adults without health conditions are usually able to
engage in religious fasts and even try “fasting” diets like the eat-stop-eat
approach while continuing their regular daily activities.

It takes about 24 hours ® without eating for your body to change how it
produces energy.

Under normal circumstances, your body breaks down food into glucose.
The glucose provides energy to the body.

During the first 24 hours without food, as your glucose storage is
depleted, your body will begin to convert glycogen from your liver and
muscles into glucose.

By the second day without food, your glucose and glycogen are depleted.

Your body will begin to break down muscle tissue to provide energy.
However, your body is designed to conserve muscle, not break it down.
So this phase provides temporary energy while your metabolism is
making a major shift.

To prevent excessive muscle loss, the body begins to rely on fat stores to
create ketones for energy, a process known as ketosis.

During the first 5 days without food, a person may lose 1—2 kilograms
(2.2—4.4 pounds) of body weight each day. Most of this weight loss is
related to dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. Over several weeks of
starvation, changes in the body usually cause weight loss to slow down to
an average of 0.3 kilograms (0.7 pounds) per day.

The more fat stores available, the longer a person can typically survive
during starvation. Once the fat stores have been completely metabolized,
the body then reverts back to muscle breakdown for energy, since it’s the
only remaining fuel source in the body.

You'll begin to experience severe adverse symptoms during the stage of
starvation where your body is using its muscle reserves for energy.

A study in the British Medical Journal © states that those undergoing a
hunger strike should be monitored closely for severe side effects of

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks

4/13,

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation
starvation after losing 10% of their body weight or has a BMI of 16.5 or
less. It also says that very serious conditions will occur when an individual
loses 18% of their body weight.

ADVERTISEMENT

Why does water intake affect survival time without
food?

With adequate water intake, some people have survived with no food for
weeks or even several months ®. Survival time is longer with water intake
because the body has much more in its reserves to replace food than
fluid. Your kidney function will diminish within a few days without proper
hydration.

One 1997 commentary ® that looked at hunger strikes suggested that a
person needs to drink about 1.5 liters of water a day to survive starvation
for a longer period of time. The author also suggested adding up to half a
teaspoon of salt a day to the water.

What are the side effects and risks of restricted
eating?

Depending on the specifics, reports suggest that some people can
survive starvation for days or weeks © However, during starvation, your

body’s many systems will begin to deteriorate.
The effects of starvation may include:

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 5/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation

¢ faintness

e dizziness

* cognitive changes

e low blood pressure

e slow heartbeat

e weakness

e dehydration

e changes in thyroid function
e abdominal pain

e electrolyte imbalances
e heart attack

e organ failure

People who have experienced starvation or very restricted food intake
may have long-term effects including:

e stunted growth
® poor bone health or osteoporosis

° post-traumatic stress or depression

Those who experience starvation for a prolonged time can’t begin to
consume normal amounts of food right away. The body needs to be very
slowly eased in to eating again to avoid adverse reactions, Known as
refeeding syndrome. The effects of refeeding syndrome may include:

heart conditions

neurological conditions

swelling

electrolyte imbalances

To reintroduce food safely, people who have experienced starvation or
malnourishment need to be cared for in a hospital or specialized medical
facility.

ADVERTISEMENT

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 6/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation

Frequently asked questions

How long can you go without eating?

Estimates ® based on events when people have been trapped or buried
suggest you can survive without food between 8 and 21 days. In 1981,
hunger strikers in the Maze Prison, Belfast, died after 45—61 days® of not
eating food.

NUTRITION Meal Kits »  SpecialDiets | HealthyEating FoodFreedom >

pounds per day. If you don’t eat for 4 days you may also experience
faintness and dizziness. Once a person loses 10% of their body weight or
has a BMI of 16.5% or less, complications due to starvation may begin.
Experts % commenting on hunger strikes recommend close observation
after 10 days of not eating if a person’s original body weight is unknown.

Can a person live 30 days without food?

Yes, it’s possible someone may live 30 days without food, although very
unlikely. Some records suggest people have survived up to 61 days °
although usually, most live 8 to 21 days.

Why does hospice stop giving food and water?

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 713

19/01/2026, 02:01

How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation
Hospice care doesn’t typically deny food or water to a person who
requests either. However, as the body prepares to die, it is common that
the need or desire for food and drinks declines. It’s also possible that
when death is near, eating may be uncomfortable and could lead to
complications that may make dying a longer and painful process. If you
have any concerns about a loved one who is receiving palliative care,
consider discussing those with them, if possible, and their care team.

Summary

Human bodies are fairly resilient. In some circumstances, the body can
function for days or weeks without proper food and water, but there are
risks.

People who have experienced starvation may have long-term health
effects, and starvation eventually becomes fatal.

People who have experienced starvation or malnourishment will need
medical treatment and close monitoring by a medical team to avoid
refeeding syndrome.

ADVERTISEMENT

Noom

Noom’s 5—minute quiz unlocks a weight loss program customized for you
— now with GLP-1 options — so you can manage your health and form
habits that last.

45 Million+ "Nutritionist

downloads Approved" 45k+ 5 & reviews

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks

8/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation

healthline

How we reviewed this article:

@ sources © HISTORY

Our experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we

update our articles when new information becomes available.

Oo Current Version

© Jan 19, 2024

Written By

Natalie Silver

Medically Reviewed By
Megan Soliman, MD

O Jun 19, 2023

Written By

Natalie Silver

Medically Reviewed By
Megan Soliman, MD

VIEW ALL HISTORY +

Share this article

mfyv-.

READ THIS NEXT

Is Eating One Meal a Day a Safe and Effective
Way to Lose Weight?

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 9/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation
Some claim that eating only one meal per day keeps your body in a
constant state of burning fat. But how safe and effective is it? We'll take ...

READ MORE —>

Pros and Cons of Intermittent Fasting

Written by Cecilia Snyder, MS, RD and Kris Gunnars, BSc

Intermittent fasting comes in many shapes and forms. This article reviews

its pros and cons so you can decide if it's worth a try.

READ MORE —>

How Much Water Do | Need to Drink?

Medically reviewed by Angela M. Bell, MD, FACP

How much water you should actually drink isn’t as simple as you’d think.
Read about the latest research, tips, what to eat for hydration, and why...

READ MORE >

Alcohol Alternatives in Recipes: What to
Consider When Swapping

Medically reviewed by Amy Richter, MS, RD

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 10/13

19/01/2026, 02:01

How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation
When choosing a nonalcoholic alternative for a recipe, it can help to
consider what the alcohol was meant to do originally. Learn more about...

READ MORE —>

How RFK Jr.’s New Drinking Policy Redefines
Moderate Alcohol Consumption

RFK Jr., the Health and Human Services Secretary, recently announced

new dietary guidelines. This included changes to the recommended limi...

READ MORE —

Why Experts Are Divided Over RFK Jr.'s
Inverted Food Pyramid

RFK Jr.'s 2025-2030 dietary guidelines include a new inverted food
pyramid. Experts have mixed reactions to these changes, with some...

READ MORE —>

How Ultra-Processed Meats, Foods Can Affect
Type 2 Diabetes Risk

Studies show that ultra-processed meats and foods are associated with a
higher risk of type 2 diabetes. Swapping ultra-processed foods with...

READ MORE —>

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks

11/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation

Coffee's Surprising Health Benefits: What the
Latest Research Says

Recent research has shown surprising health benefits of coffee, including
a reduction in AFib frequency and a decrease in the risk of heart...

READ MORE >

Best Foods to Help You Live a Longer,
Healthier Life, According to Research

Research indicates that following a diet centered on fruits, vegetables,
and lean proteins, such as the Mediterranean diet, may contribute to a...

READ MORE >

RFK Jr.'s New Dietary Guidelines Reduce
Added Sugars, Processed Foods

The 2025-2030 Dietary Guidelines for Americans prioritize protein and
recommend reducing the intake of added sugars and ultra-processed...

READ MORE ->

f§ X PO a F

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 12/13

19/01/2026, 02:01 How Long Can You Live Without Food? Effects of Starvation

Get our wellness newsletter

Filter out the noise and nurture your inbox with health and wellness

advice that’s inclusive and rooted in medical expertise.

Enter your email

Your privacy is important to us

About Us Sitemap

Contact Us Medical Affairs
Privacy Policy Content Integrity
Privacy Settings Newsletters

Advertising Policy

Health Topics

© 2026 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO
Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational
purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or
treatment. See additional information.

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/how-long-can-you-live-without-food#restricted-eating-risks 13/13