19/01/2026, 01:51 Sleep Deprivation and Deficiency - What Are Sleep Deprivation and Deficiency? | NHLBI, NIH

SLEEP DEPRIVATION AND DEFICIENCY MENU

< Back To Home

SLEEP DEPRIVATION AND DEFICIENCY

What Are Sleep Deprivation and Deficiency?

Sleep deprivation is a condition that occurs if you don't get enough sleep. Sleep deficiency is a
broader concept. It occurs if you have one or more of the following:

e You don't get enough sleep (sleep deprivation)

e You sleep at the wrong time of day

e You don't sleep well or get all the different types of sleep your body needs

e You have a sleep disorder that prevents you from getting enough sleep or causes

poor-quality sleep

This topic focuses on sleep deficiency.

https://www.nhibi.nih.gov/health/sleep-deprivation 1/3

19/01/2026, 01:51 Sleep Deprivation and Deficiency - What Are Sleep Deprivation and Deficiency? | NHLBI, NIH
Sleeping is a basic human need, like eating, drinking, and breathing. Like these other needs,
sleeping is vital for good health and well-being throughout your lifetime.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 1 in 3 adults in the United
States reported not getting enough rest or sleep every day.

Nearly 40% of adults report falling asleep during the day without meaning to at least once a
month. Also, an estimated 50 to 70 million Americans have chronic, or ongoing, sleep
disorders.

Sleep deficiency can lead to physical and mental health problems, injuries, loss of
productivity, and even a greater likelihood of death. To understand sleep deficiency, it helps
to understand what makes you sleep and how it affects your health.

Interested in learning more about the
science behind how sleep works,
including sleep/wake cycles, and sleep
phases & stages? Visit our How Sleep
Works section for more information.

Sleep deficiency can interfere with work, school, driving, and social functioning. You might
have trouble learning, focusing, and reacting. Also, you might find it hard to judge other
people's emotions and reactions. Sleep deficiency also can make you feel frustrated, cranky,
or worried in social situations.

The symptoms of sleep deficiency may differ between children and adults. Children who are
sleep deficient might be overly active and have problems paying attention. They also might
misbehave, and their school performance can suffer.

Sleep deficiency is linked to many chronic health problems, including heart disease, kidney
disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, stroke, obesity, and depression.

Sleep deficiency is also linked to a higher chance of injury in adults, teens, and children. For
example, sleepiness while driving (not related to alcohol) is responsible for serious car crash
injuries and death. In older adults, sleep deficiency may be linked to a higher chance of falls
and broken bones.

https://www.nhibi.nih.gov/health/sleep-deprivation

19/01/2026, 01:51 Sleep Deprivation and Deficiency - What Are Sleep Deprivation and Deficiency? | NHLBI, NIH
Sleep deficiency has also played a role in human mistakes linked to tragic accidents, such as
nuclear reactor meltdowns, grounding of large ships, and plane crashes.

Acommon myth is that people can learn to get by on little sleep with no negative effects.
However, research shows that getting enough quality sleep at the right times is vital for
mental health, physical health, quality of life, and safety.

Last updated on March 24, 2022

https://www.nhibi.nih.gov/health/sleep-deprivation

3/3